The Project Gutenberg eBook of Nine Little Goslings, by Susan Coolidge


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Nine Little Goslings


Author: Susan Coolidge



Release Date: December 31, 2008  [eBook #27678]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NINE LITTLE GOSLINGS***


E-text prepared by Adrian Mastronardi, Emmy, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 27678-h.htm or 27678-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/6/7/27678/27678-h/27678-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/6/7/27678/27678-h.zip)





NINE LITTLE GOSLINGS.

by

SUSAN COOLIDGE,

Author of "The New Year's Bargain," "Mischief's Thanksgiving," "What
Katy Did," "What Katy Did at School."

With Illustrations.

   CURLY LOCKS.
   GOOSEY, GOOSEY GANDER.
   LITTLE BO-PEEP.
   MISTRESS MARY.
   LADY BIRD.
   ONE, TWO, BUCKLE MY SHOE.
   RIDE A COCK-HORSE.
   LADY QUEEN ANNE.
   UP, UP, UP, AND DOWN, DOWN, DOWN-Y.


[Illustration]







Boston:
Roberts Brothers.
1893.

Copyright, 1875.
By Roberts Brothers.

[Illustration]

University Press · John Wilson & Son,
Cambridge.



          _When nursery lamps are veiled, and nurse is singing
                        In accents low,
           Timing her music to the cradle's swinging,
                        Now fast, now slow,--_

          _Singing of Baby Bunting, soft and furry
                        In rabbit cloak,
           Or rock-a-byed amid the toss and flurry
                        Of wind-swept oak;_

          _Of Boy-Blue sleeping with his horn beside him,
                        Of my son John,
           Who went to bed (let all good boys deride him)
                        With stockings on;_

          _Of sweet Bo-Peep following her lambkins straying;
                        Of Dames in shoes;
           Of cows, considerate, 'mid the Piper's playing,
                        Which tune to choose;_

          _Of Gotham's wise men bowling o'er the billow,
                        Or him, less wise,
           Who chose rough bramble-bushes for a pillow,
                        And scratched his eyes,--_

          _It may be, while she sings, that through the portal
                        Soft footsteps glide,
           And, all invisible to grown-up mortal,
                        At cradle side_

          _Sits Mother Goose herself, the dear old mother,
                        And rocks and croons,
           In tones which Baby hearkens, but no other,
                        Her old-new tunes!_

          _I think it must be so, else why, years after,
                        Do we retrace
           And mix with shadowy, recollected laughter
                        Thoughts of that face;_

          _Seen, yet unseen, beaming across the ages,
                        Brimful of fun
           And wit and wisdom, baffling all the sages
                        Under the sun?_

          _A grown-up child has place still, which no other
                        May dare refuse;
           I, grown up, bring this offering to our Mother,
                          To Mother Goose;_

          _And, standing with the babies at that olden,
                        Immortal knee,
           I seem to feel her smile, benign and golden,
                        Falling on me._




[Illustration]

CONTENTS.


          CHAP                                         PAGE
             I. CURLY LOCKS                               1
            II. GOOSEY, GOOSEY GANDER                    40
           III. LITTLE BO-PEEP                           65
            IV. MISTRESS MARY                           101
             V. LADY BIRD                               137
            VI. ONE, TWO, BUCKLE MY SHOE                165
           VII. RIDE A COCK-HORSE                       197
          VIII. LADY QUEEN ANNE                         228
            IX. UP, UP, UP, AND DOWN, DOWN, DOWN-Y      259

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




CURLY LOCKS.


WHEN a little girl is six and a little boy is six, they like pretty much
the same things and enjoy pretty much the same games. She wears an
apron, and he a jacket and trousers, but they are both equally fond of
running races, spinning tops, flying kites, going down hill on sleds,
and making a noise in the open air. But when the little girl gets to be
eleven or twelve, and to grow thin and long, so that every two months a
tuck has to be let down in her frocks, then a great difference becomes
visible. The boy goes on racing and whooping and comporting himself
generally like a young colt in a pasture; but she turns quiet and shy,
cares no longer for rough play or exercise, takes droll little
sentimental fancies into her head, and likes best the books which make
her cry. Almost all girls have a fit of this kind some time or other in
the course of their lives; and it is rather a good thing to have it
early, for little folks get over such attacks more easily than big ones.
Perhaps we may live to see the day when wise mammas, going through the
list of nursery diseases which their children have had, will wind up
triumphantly with, "Mumps, measles, chicken-pox,--and they are all over
with 'Amy Herbert,' 'The Heir of Redclyffe,' and the notion that they
are going to be miserable for the rest of their lives!"

Sometimes this odd change comes after an illness when a little girl
feels weak and out of sorts, and does not know exactly what is the
matter. This is the way it came to Johnnie Carr, a girl whom some of you
who read this are already acquainted with. She had intermittent fever
the year after her sisters Katy and Clover came from boarding-school,
and was quite ill for several weeks. Everybody in the house was sorry to
have Johnnie sick. Katy nursed, petted, and cosseted her in the
tenderest way. Clover brought flowers to the bedside and read books
aloud, and told Johnnie interesting stories. Elsie cut out paper dolls
for her by dozens, painted their cheeks pink and their eyes blue, and
made for them beautiful dresses and jackets of every color and fashion.
Papa never came in without some little present or treat in his pocket
for Johnnie. So long as she was in bed, and all these nice things were
doing for her, Johnnie liked being ill very much, but when she began to
sit up and go down to dinner, and the family spoke of her as almost well
again, _then_ a time of unhappiness set in. The Johnnie who got out of
bed after the fever was not the Johnnie of a month before. There were
two inches more of her for one thing, for she had taken the opportunity
to grow prodigiously, as sick children often do. Her head ached at
times, her back felt weak, and her legs shook when she tried to run
about. All sorts of queer and disagreeable feelings attacked her. Her
hair had fallen out during the fever so that Papa thought it best to
have it shaved close. Katy made a pretty silk-lined cap for her to wear,
but the girls at school laughed at the cap, and that troubled Johnnie
very much. Then, when the new hair grew, thick and soft as the plumy
down on a bird's wing, a fresh affliction set in, for the hair came out
in small round rings all over her head, which made her look like a
baby. Elsie called her "Curly," and gradually the others adopted the
name, till at last nobody used any other except the servants, who still
said "Miss Johnnie." It was hard to recognize the old Johnnie, square
and sturdy and full of merry life, in poor, thin, whining Curly, always
complaining of something, who lay on the sofa reading story-books, and
begging Phil and Dorry to let her alone, not to tease her, and to go off
and play by themselves. Her eyes looked twice as big as usual, because
her face was so small and pale, and though she was still a pretty child,
it was in a different way from the old prettiness. Katy and Clover were
very kind and gentle always, but Elsie sometimes lost patience entirely,
and the boys openly declared that Curly was a cross-patch, and hadn't a
bit of fun left in her.

One afternoon she was lying on the sofa with the "Wide Wide World" in
her hand. Her eyelids were very red from crying over Alice's death, but
she had galloped on, and was now reading the part where Ellen
Montgomery goes to live with her rich relatives in Scotland.

"Oh, dear," sighed Johnnie. "How splendid it was for her! Just think,
Clover, riding lessons, and a watch, and her uncle takes her to see all
sorts of places, and they call her their White Rose! Oh, dear! I wish
_we_ had relations in Scotland."

"We haven't, you know," remarked Clover, threading her needle with a
fresh bit of blue worsted.

"I know it. It's too bad. Nothing ever does happen in this stupid place.
The girls in books always do have such nice times. Ellen could leap, and
she spoke French _beau_tifully. She learned at that place, you know, the
place where the Humphreys lived."

"Litchfield Co., Connecticut," said Clover mischievously. "Katy was
there last summer, you recollect. I guess they don't _all_ speak such
good French. Katy didn't notice it."

"Ellen did," persisted Johnnie. "Her uncle and all those people were so
surprised when they heard her. Wouldn't it be grand to be an adopted
child, Clover?"

"To be adopted by people who gave you your bath like a baby when you
were thirteen years old, and tapped your lips when they didn't want you
to speak, and stole your Pilgrim's Progresses? No, thank you. I would
much rather stay as I am."

"I wouldn't," replied Johnnie pensively. "I don't like this place very
much. I should love to be rich and to travel in Europe."

At this moment Papa and Katy came in together. Katy was laughing, and
Papa looked as if he had just bitten a smile off short. In his hand was
a letter.

"Oh, Clovy," began Katy, but Papa interposed with "Katy, hold your
tongue;" and though he looked quizzical as he said it, Katy saw that he
was half in earnest, and stopped at once.

"We're about to have a visitor," he went on, picking Johnnie up and
settling her in his lap,--"a distinguished visitor. Curly, you must put
on your best manners, for she comes especially to see you."

"A visitor! How nice! Who is it?" cried Clover and Johnnie with one
voice. Visitors were rare in Burnet, and the children regarded them
always as a treat.

"Her name is Miss Inches,--Marion Joanna Inches," replied Dr. Carr,
glancing at the letter. "She's a sort of godmother of yours, Curly;
you've got half her name."

"Was I really named after her?"

"Yes. She and Mamma were school-friends, and though they never met after
leaving school, Mamma was fond of her, and when little No. 4 came, she
decided to call her after her old intimate. That silver mug of yours was
a present from her."

"Was it? Where does she live?"

"At a place called Inches Mills, in Massachusetts. She's the rich lady
of the village, and has a beautiful house and grounds, where she lives
all alone by herself. Her letter is written at Niagara. She is going to
the Mammoth Cave, and writes to ask if it will be convenient for us to
have her stop for a few days on the way. She wants to see her old
friend's children, she says, and especially her namesake."

"Oh, dear!" sighed Johnnie, ruffling her short hairs with her fingers.
"I wish my curls were longer. What _will_ she think when she sees me?"

"She'll think

          "There is a little girl, and she has a little curl
             Right in the middle of her forehead;
           When she is good she is very, very good,
             And when she is bad she is horrid--"

said Dr. Carr, laughing. But Johnnie didn't laugh back. Her lip
trembled, and she said,--

"I'm not horrid _really_, am I?"

"Not a bit," replied her father; "you're only a little goose now and
then, and I'm such an old gander that I don't mind that a bit."

Johnnie smiled and was comforted. Her thoughts turned to the coming
visitor.

"Perhaps she'll be like the rich ladies in story-books," she said to
herself.

Next day Miss Inches came. Katy was an experienced housekeeper now, and
did not worry over coming guests as once she did. The house was always
in pleasant, home-like order; and though Debby and Alexander had
fulfilled Aunt Izzie's prediction by marrying one another, both stayed
on at Dr. Carr's and were as good and faithful as ever, so Katy had no
anxieties as to the dinners and breakfasts. It was late in the afternoon
when the visitor arrived. Fresh flowers filled the vases, for it was
early June, and the garden-beds were sweet with roses and lilies of the
valley. The older girls wore new summer muslins, and Johnnie in white,
her short curls tied back with a blue ribbon, looked unusually pretty
and delicate.

Miss Inches, a wide-awake, handsome woman, seemed much pleased to see
them all.

"So this is my name-child," she said, putting her arm about Johnnie.
"This is my little Joanna? You're the only child I have any share in,
Joanna; I hope we shall love each other very deeply."

Miss Inches' hand was large and white, with beautiful rings on the
fingers. Johnnie was flattered at being patted by such a hand, and
cuddled affectionately to the side of her name-mamma.

"What eyes she has!" murmured Miss Inches to Dr. Carr. She lowered her
voice, but Johnnie caught every word. "Such a lambent blue, and so full
of soul. She is quite different from the rest of your daughters, Dr.
Carr; don't you think so?"

"She has been ill recently, and is looking thin," replied the prosaic
Papa.

"Oh, it isn't _that_! There is something else,--hard to put into words,
but I feel it! You don't see it? Well, that only confirms a theory of
mine, that people are often blind to the qualities of their nearest
relations. We cannot get our own families into proper perspective. It
isn't possible."

These fine words were lost on Johnnie, but she understood that she was
pronounced nicer than the rest of the family. This pleased her: she
began to think that she should like Miss Inches very much indeed.

Dr. Carr was not so much pleased. The note from Miss Inches, over which
he and Katy had laughed, but which was not shown to the rest, had
prepared him for a visitor of rather high-flown ideas, but he did not
like having Johnnie singled out as the subject of this kind of praise.
However, he said to himself, "It doesn't matter. She means well, and
jolly little Johnnie won't be harmed by a few days of it."

Jolly little Johnnie would not have been harmed, but the pale,
sentimental Johnnie left behind by the recently departed intermittent
fever, decidedly _was_. Before Miss Inches had been four days in Burnet,
Johnnie adored her and followed her about like a shadow. Never had
anybody loved her as Miss Inches did, she thought, or discovered such
fine things in her character. Ten long years and a half had she lived
with Papa and the children, and not one of them had found out that her
eyes were full of soul, and an expression "of mingled mirth and
melancholy unusual in a childish face, and more like that of _Goethe's
Mignon_ than any thing else in the world of fiction!" Johnnie had never
heard of "_Mignon_," but it was delightful to be told that she resembled
her, and she made Miss Inches a present of the whole of her foolish
little heart on the spot.

"Oh, if Papa would but give you to me!" exclaimed Miss Inches one day.
"If only I could have you for my own, what a delight it would be! My
whole theory of training is so different,--you should never waste your
energies in house-work, my darling, (Johnnie had been dusting the
parlor); it is sheer waste, with an intelligence like yours lying fallow
and only waiting for the master's hand. Would you come, Johnnie, if
Papa consented? Inches Mills is a quiet place, but lovely. There are a
few bright minds in the neighborhood; we are near Boston, and not too
far from Concord. Such a pretty room as you should have, darling, fitted
up in blue and rose-buds, or--no, Morris green and Pompeian-red would be
prettier, perhaps. What a joy it would be to choose pictures for
it,--pictures, every one of which should be an impulse in the best Art
direction! And how you would revel in the garden, and in the fruit! My
strawberries are the finest I ever saw; I have two Alderney cows and
quantities of cream. Don't you think you could be happy to come and be
my own little Curly, if Papa would consent?"

"Yes, yes," said Johnnie eagerly. "And I could come home sometimes,
couldn't I?"

"Every year," replied Miss Inches. "We'll take such lovely journeys
together, Johnnie, and see all sorts of interesting places. Would you
like best to go to California or to Switzerland next summer? I think, on
the whole, Switzerland would be best. I want you to form a good French
accent at once, but, above all, to study German, the language of
_thought_. Then there is music. We might spend the winter at
_Stuttgard_--"

Decidedly Miss Inches was counting on her chicken before hatching it,
for Dr. Carr had yet to be consulted, and he was not a parent who
enjoyed interference with his nest or nestlings. When Miss Inches
attacked him on the subject, his first impulse was to whistle with
amazement. Next he laughed, and then he became almost angry. Miss Inches
talked very fast, describing the fine things she would do with Johnnie,
and for her; and Dr. Carr, having no chance to put in a word, listened
patiently, and watched his little girl, who was clinging to her new
friend and looking very eager and anxious. He saw that her heart was set
on being "adopted," and, wise man that he was, it occurred to him that
it might be well to grant her wish in part, and let her find out by
experiment what was really the best and happiest thing. So he did not
say "No" decidedly, as he at first meant, but took Johnnie on his knee,
and asked,--

"Well, Curly, so you want to leave Papa and Katy and Clover, and go away
to be Miss Inches' little girl, do you?"

"I'm coming home to see you every single summer," said Johnnie.

"Indeed! That will be nice for us," responded Dr. Carr cheerfully. "But
somehow I don't seem to feel as if I could quite make up my mind to give
my Curly Locks away. Perhaps in a year or two, when we are used to being
without her, I may feel differently. Suppose, instead, we make a
compromise."

"Yes," said Miss Inches, eagerly.

"Yes," put in Johnnie, who had not the least idea of what a compromise
might be.

"I can't _give_ away my little girl,--not yet,"--went on Dr. Carr
fondly. "But if Miss Inches likes I'll _lend_ her for a little while.
You may go home with Miss Inches, Johnnie, and stay four months,--to the
first of October, let us say." ("She'll miss two weeks' schooling, but
that's no great matter," thought Papa to himself.) "This will give you,
my dear lady, a chance to try the experiment of having a child in your
house. Perhaps you may not like it so well as you fancy. If you do, and
if Johnnie still prefers to remain with you, there will be time enough
then to talk over further plans. How will this answer?"

Johnnie was delighted, Miss Inches not so much so.

"Of course," she said, "it isn't so satisfactory to have the thing left
uncertain, because it retards the regular plan of development which I
have formed for Johnnie. However, I can allow for a parent's feelings,
and I thank you very much, Dr. Carr. I feel assured that, as you have
five other children, you will in time make up your mind to let me keep
Johnnie entirely as mine. It puts a new value into life,--this chance of
having an immortal intelligence placed in my hands to train. It will be
a real delight to do so, and I flatter myself the result will surprise
you all."

Dr. Carr's eyes twinkled wickedly, but he made Miss Inches the politest
of bows, and said: "You are very kind, I am sure, and I hope Johnnie
will be good and not give you much trouble. When would you wish her
visit to commence?"

"Oh--now, if you do not object. I should so enjoy taking her with me to
the Mammoth Cave, and afterward straight home to Massachusetts. You
would like to see the Cave and the eyeless fish, wouldn't you, darling?"

"Oh yes, Papa, yes!" cried Johnnie. Dr. Carr was rather taken aback, but
he made no objection, and Johnnie ran off to tell the rest of the family
the news of her good fortune.

Their dismay cannot be described. "I really do think that Papa is
crazy," said Clover that night; and though Katy scolded her for using
such an expression, her own confidence in his judgment was puzzled and
shaken. She comforted herself with a long letter to Cousin Helen,
telling her all about the affair. Elsie cried herself to sleep three
nights running, and the boys were furious.

"The _idea_ of such a thing," cried Dorry, flinging himself about, while
Phil put a tablespoonful of black pepper and two spools of thread into
his cannon, and announced that if Miss Inches dared to take Johnnie
outside the gate, he would shoot her dead, he would, just as sure as he
was alive!

In spite of this awful threat, Miss Inches persisted in her plan.
Johnnie's little trunk was packed by Clover and Katy, who watered its
contents with tears as they smoothed and folded the frocks and aprons,
which looked so like their Curly as to seem a part of herself,--their
Curly, who was so glad to leave them!

"Never mind the thick things," remarked Dr. Carr, as Katy came through
the hall with Johnnie's winter jacket on her arm. "Put in one warmish
dress for cool days, and leave the rest. They can be sent on _if_
Johnnie decides to stay."

Papa looked so droll and gave such a large wink at the word "if," that
Katy and Clover felt their hearts lighten surprisingly, and finished the
packing in better spirits. The good-by, however, was a sorry affair. The
girls cried; Dorry and Phil sniffed and looked fiercely at Miss Inches;
old Mary stood on the steps with her apron thrown over her head; and Dr.
Carr's face was so grave and sad that it quite frightened Johnnie. She
cried too, and clung to Katy. Almost she said, "I won't go," but she
thought of the eyeless fish, and didn't say it. The carriage drove off,
Miss Inches petted her, everything was new and exciting, and before long
she was happy again, only now and then a thought of home would come to
make her lips quiver and her eyes fill.

The wonderful Cave, with its vaults and galleries hung with glittering
crystals, its underground river and dark lake, was so like a fairy tale,
that Johnnie felt as if she _must_ go right back and tell the family at
home about it. She relieved her feelings by a long letter to Elsie,
which made them all laugh very much. In it she said, "Ellen Montgomery
didn't have any thing half so nice as the Cave, and Mamma Marion never
taps my lips." Miss Inches, it seemed, wished to be called "Mamma
Marion." Every mile of the journey was an enjoyment to Johnnie. Miss
Inches bought pretty presents for her wherever they stopped: altogether,
it was quite like being some little girl taking a beautiful excursion in
a story-book, instead of plain Johnnie Carr, and Johnnie felt that to be
an "adopted child" was every bit as nice as she had supposed, and even
nicer.

It was late in the evening when they reached Inches Mills, so nothing
could be seen of the house, except that it was big and had trees around
it. Johnnie went to sleep in a large bedroom with a huge double bed all
to herself, and felt very grown-up and important.

The next day was given to unpacking and seeing the grounds; after that,
Miss Inches said they must begin to lead a regular life, and Johnnie
must study. Johnnie had been to school all winter, and in the natural
course of things would have had holidays now. Mamma Marion, however,
declared that so long an idle time would not do at all.

"Education, my darling, is not a thing of periods," she explained. "It
should be like the air, absorbed, as it were, all the time, not like a
meal, eaten just so often in the day. This idea of teaching by paroxysms
is one of the fatal mistakes of the age."

So all that warm July Johnnie had French lessons and German, and lessons
in natural philosophy, beside studying English literature after a plan
of Miss Inches' own, which combined history and geography and geology,
with readings from various books, and accounted for the existence of
all the great geniuses of the world, as if they had been made after a
regular recipe,--something like this:--

                      TO MAKE A POET.

          Take a political situation, add a rocky soil, and
          the western slope of a great water-shed, pour into
          a mould and garnish with laurel leaves. It will be
          found delicious!

The "lambent blue" of Johnnie's eyes grew more lambent than ever as she
tried to make head and tail of this wond
into the silence of horror. She had just caught sight of Belinda's
cropped head.

"Tommy did it. He cut off all our hairs," blubbered Belinda.

Mell shut her eyes tight. She was too frightened to move. She felt
herself clutched, dragged in-doors, upstairs, and her ears boxed, all
in a moment. Mrs. Davis pushed her violently forward, a door banged, a
key turned.

"There you stay for a week, and on bread and water," cried a voice
through the keyhole; and Mell, opening her eyes, found herself in the
dark and alone. She knew very well where she was,--in the closet under
the attic stairs; a place she dreaded, because she had once seen a mouse
there, and Mell was particularly afraid of mice.

"Oh, don't shut me up here! Please don't; please let me out, please,"
she shrieked. But Mrs. Davis had gone downstairs, and nobody replied.

"They'll come and eat me up as soon as it grows dark," thought Mell; and
this idea so terrified her that she began to beat on the door with her
hands, and scream at the top of her voice. No one came. And after a
while she grew so weary that she could scream no longer; so she curled
herself up on the floor of the closet and went to sleep.

When she woke the closet was darker than ever. Mell felt weak and ill
for want of food. Her head ached; her bones ached from lying on the hard
floor; she was feverish and very miserable.

"It's dark; she's going to leave me here all night," sobbed Mell. "Oh!
won't somebody come and let me out?" Now _would_ have been a chance to
play that she was a princess shut up in a dark dungeon! But Mell didn't
feel like playing. She was a real little girl shut up in a closet, and
it wasn't nice at all. There was no "make believe" left in her just
then.

Suddenly a fine scratching sound began in the wall close to her head.
"The mouse, the mouse," thought Mell, and she gave a shriek so loud that
it would have scared away a whole army of mice. The shriek sounded all
over the house. It woke the children in their beds, and rang in the ears
of Mrs. Davis, who was sitting down to supper in the kitchen with
somebody just arrived,--a big, brown, rough-bearded somebody, who smelt
of salt-water; Mell's father, in short, returned from sea.

"What's that?" asked Captain Davis, putting down his cup.

Mrs. Davis was frightened. In the excitement of her husband's sudden
return she had quite forgotten poor Mell in her closet.

"Some of the children," she answered, trying to speak carelessly. "I'll
run up."

Another terrible shriek. Captain Davis seized a candle, and hurried
upstairs after his wife.

He was just in time to see her unlock the closet door, and poor Mell
tumble out, tear-stained, white, frightened almost out of her wits. She
clutched her step-mother's dress with both hands.

"Oh, don't make me go in there again!" she pleaded. "I will be good.
I'll never meddle with the things in the chest any more. There are mice
in there, hundreds of 'em; they'll run all over me; they'll eat me up.
Oh, _don't_ make me go in there again!"

"Why, it's my little Mell!" cried the amazed Captain. "Shiver my
timbers! what does this mean?" He lifted Mell into his arms and looked
sternly at his wife.

"She's been a _very_ naughty girl," said Mrs. Davis, trying to speak
boldly. "So naughty that I had to shut her up. Stop crying so, Mell. I
forgive you now. I hope you'll never be so bad again."

"Oh, may I come out?" sobbed Mell, clinging to her father's neck. "You
said I must stay a week, but I couldn't do that, the mice would kill me.
Mice are so awful!" She shuddered with horror as she spoke.

"This ain't a pleasant welcome for a man just in from sea," remarked
Captain Davis.

Mrs. Davis explained and tried to smooth the matter over, but the
Captain continued very sober all that evening. Mell thought it was
because he was angry with her, but her step-mother knew very well that
she also was in disgrace. The truth was that the Captain was thinking
what to do. He was not a man of many words, but he felt that affairs at
home must go very wrong when he was away, and that such a state of
things was bad for his wife, and very bad for Mell.

So in a day or two he went off to Cape Cod, "to see his old mother," as
he said, in reality to consult her as to what should be done. When he
came back, he asked Mell how she would like to go and live with
Grandmother and be her little girl.

"Will she shut me up in closets?" asked Mell apprehensively.

"No, she'll be very kind to you if you are a good girl. Grandma's an old
lady now. She wants a handy child about the house to help, and sort of
pet and make much of."

"I--guess--I'll--like--it," said Mell slowly. "It's a good way from
here, isn't it?"

"Yes,--a good way."

Mell nodded her head in a satisfied manner. "_She'll_ not often come
there," she thought. "She" meant Mrs. Davis.

Mrs. Davis was unusually pleasant for the few remaining days which Mell
spent at home. I do not think she had ever meant to treat Mell unkindly,
but she had a hot temper, and the care of five unruly children is a good
deal for one woman to undertake, without counting in a little
step-daughter with a head stuffed with fairy stories. She washed and
ironed, mended and packed for Mell as kindly as possible, and did not
say one cross word, not even when her husband brought the coral necklace
from the big chest and gave it to Mell for her very own. "The child had
a right to her mother's necklace," he said. All was peaceful and serene,
and when Mell said good-by she surprised herself by feeling quite sorry
to go, and kissed Gabella Sarah's small face with tears in her eyes.

Grandmother was just such a dear old woman as one reads about in books.
Her cheeks were all criss-crossed with little wrinkles, which made her
look as if she were always smiling. Her forehead was smooth, her eyes
kind and blue. She was small, thin, and wiry. Her laugh was as fresh as
a young woman's. Mell loved her at once, and was sure that she should be
happy to live with her and be her little girl.

"Why, Bethuel, you've brought me a real good helper," said Grandmother,
as Mell ran to and fro, setting the tea-table, cutting bread, and
learning where things were kept. "I shall sit like a lady and do nothing
but rock in my cheer now that I've got Mell." Mell heard the kind words,
and sprang about more busily than ever. It was a new thing to be
praised.

Before Captain Davis went next day he walked over to Barnstable, and
came back with a parcel in his hand. The parcel was for Mell. It
contained the Fairy Tales,--all new and complete, bound in beautiful red
covers.

"You shall read them aloud to me in the evenings," said Grandmother.

That night, if anybody had peeped through the window of Grandmother's
little house he would have seen a pleasant sight. The kitchen was all
in order; the lamp burned clear; Grandmother sat in her rocking-chair
with a smile on her kind old face, while Mell, at her feet on a little
stool, opened the Fairy Tales, and prepared to read. "Once upon a time
there lived a beautiful Princess," she began;--then a sudden sense of
the delightfulness of all this overcame her. She dropped the book into
her lap, clasped her hands tight, and said, half to herself, half to
Grandmother, "_Isn't_ it nice?"

[Illustration]




MISTRESS MARY.


IT was the first of May; but May was in an April mood,--half cloudy,
half shiny,--and belied her name. Sprinkles of silvery rain dotted the
way-side dust; flashes of sun caught the drops as they fell, and turned
each into a tiny mirror fit for fairy faces. The trees were raining too,
showers of willow-catkins and cherry-bud calyxes, which fell noiselessly
and strewed the ground. The children kicked the soft brown drifts aside
with their feet as they walked along.

The doors of the Methodist meeting-house at Valley Hill stood open, and
crowds of men and women and children were going into them. It was not
Sunday which called the people together: it was the annual Conference
meeting; and all the country round was there to hear the reports and
learn where the ministers were to be sent for the next two years.
Methodist clergymen, you know, are not "called" by the people of the
parish, as other clergymen are. They go where the church sends them, and
every second year they are all changed to other parishes. This, it is
thought, keeps the people and pastors fresh and interested in each
other. But I don't know. Human beings, as well as vegetables, have a
trick of putting down roots; and even a cabbage or a potato would resent
such transplanting, and would refuse to thrive.

Sometimes, when a parish has become attached to its minister, it will
plead to have him stay longer. Now and then this request is granted;
but, as a rule, the minister has to go. And it is a hard rule for his
wife and children, who have to go too.

The Valley Hill people "thought a heap" of their minister, Mr. Forcythe,
and had begged hard that he might stay with them for another term.
Everybody belonging to the church had come to the meeting feeling
anxious, and yet pretty certain that the answer would be favorable. All
over the building, people were whispering about the matter, and heads
were nodding and bowing. The bonnets on these heads were curiously
alike. Mrs. Perry, the village milliner, never had more than one pattern
hat. "That is what is worn," she said; and nobody disputed the fact,
which saved Mrs. Perry trouble. The Valley Hill people liked it just as
well, and didn't mind the lack of variety. This year Mrs. Perry had
announced yellow to be the fashion, so nine out of ten of the hats
present were trimmed with yellow ribbon crossed in just the same way
over a yellow straw crown; and the church looked like a bed of sisterly
tulips nodding and bowing in the wind.

Bishop Judson was the person to read the announcements. He was a nice
old man, kind at heart, though formal in manner, and anxious eyes were
fixed on him as he got up with a paper in his hand. That important
little paper held comfort or discomfort for ever so many people. Every
one bent forward to listen. It was so still all over the church that you
might have heard a pin drop. The Bishop began with a little speech about
the virtues of patience and contentment, and how important it was that
everybody should be quite satisfied whatever happened to them. Then he
opened the paper.

"Brother Johnson, Middlebury," he read. Middlebury was a favorite
parish, so Brother Johnson looked pleased, and Sister Johnson was
congratulated by the friends who sat near her. "Brother Woodward, Little
Falls; Brother Ashe, Plunxet; Brother Allen, Claxton Corners." And so
on. Some faces grew bright, some sad, as the reading proceeded. At last
"Brother Forcythe, Redding; Brother Martin, Valley Hill," was announced.
A quiver of disappointment went over the church, and a little girl
sitting in the gallery began to cry.

"My dear, my dear," whispered her mother, much distressed at her sobs
and gulps. People looked up from below; but Mary could not stop. She
took her mother's handkerchief and held it tight over her mouth; but the
sobs would come. Her heart was half-broken at the idea of leaving Valley
Hill and going to that horrid Redding, where nobody wanted to go.

Old Mrs. Clapp, from behind, reached over and gave her a bunch of
fennel. But the fennel only made Mary cry harder. In Redding, she was
sure, would be no kind Mrs. Clapp, no "meeting-house seed;" and her sobs
grew thicker at the thought.

"I observe that your little daughter seems to be distressed," said
Bishop Judson, as Mrs. Forcythe led the sobbing Mary down from the
gallery at the end of service. "Children of her age form strong
attachments to places, I am aware. But it is well to break them before
they become unduly strong. Here we have no continuing city, you know."

"Yes," said poor Mrs. Forcythe, with a meek sigh. She had been married
fourteen years, and this was her seventh move.

"Redding--hum--is a desirable place in some respects," went on the
Bishop. "There is a great work to do there,--a great work. It requires a
man of Brother Forcythe's energy to meet it. Mistress Mary here will
doubtless find consolation in the thought that her father's sphere of
usefulness is--h'm--enlarged."

"But we shan't have any garden," faltered Mary, "Tilly Brooks, who was
there before, says it isn't a bit nice. She never saw a flower all the
time she was there, she said. I'd just planted my bed in the garden
here. Mrs. Clapp gave me six pansies, and it was going to be so pretty.
Now I've got to--leave--'em." Her voice died away into sobs.

"Tut, tut!" said the Bishop. "The customs of a church cannot be set
aside to accommodate a child's flower-bed. You'll find other things to
please you in Redding, Mistress Mary. Come, come, dry your eyes. Your
father's daughter should not set an example like this."

"No, sir," gulped Mary, mortified at this reproof from the Bishop, who
was an important person, and much looked up to. She did her best to stop
crying, but it was hard work. When they reached home, the sight of the
pansies perking their yellow and purple faces up to meet her, renewed
her grief. There was her mignonette seed not yet sprouted. If she had
known that they were going away, she would not have planted any. There,
worst of all, was the corner where she had planned such a nice surprise
for her mother,--"A. F." in green parsley letters. A. F. stood for Anne
Forcythe. Now, mother would never see the letters or know any thing
about it. Oh dear, oh dear!

Mrs. Forcythe's own disappointment was great, for they had all made sure
that they should stay. But, like a true mother, she put her share of the
grief aside, and thought only of comforting Mary.

"Don't feel so badly, dear," she said. "Recollect, you'll have Papa
still, and me and Frank and little Peter. We'll manage to be happy
somehow. Redding isn't half so disagreeable as you think."

"Yes, it is. Tilly said so. I was going to have radishes and a
rose-bush," replied Mary tearfully. "There's a robin just building in
the elm-tree now. There won't be any trees in Redding; only horrid hard
cobble-stones."

"We must hope for the best," said Mrs. Forcythe, who did not enjoy the
idea of the cobble-stones any more than Mary did.

"Only ten days more at Valley Hill," was the first thought that came
into Mary's mind the next morning. She went downstairs cross and out of
spirits. Her mother was laying sheets and table-cloths in a trunk. The
books were gone from the little book-shelf; every thing had already
begun to look unsettled and uncomfortable.

"I shall depend on you to take care of little Peter," said Mrs.
Forcythe. "We shall all have to work hard if we are to get off next
Monday week."

Mary gave an impatient shrug with her shoulders. She loved little Peter,
but it seemed an injury just then to have to take care of him. All the
time that her mother was sorting, counting, and arranging where things
should go, she sat in the window sullen and unhappy, looking out at the
pansy-bed. Peter grew tired of a companion who did nothing to amuse him,
and began to sprawl and scramble upstairs.

"O baby, come back!" cried Mary, and, I am sorry to say, gave him a
shake. Peter cried, and that brought poor weary Mrs. Forcythe
downstairs.

"Can't you manage to make him happy?" she said. Mary only pouted.

All that day and the next and the next it was the same. Mrs. Forcythe
was busy every moment. There were a thousand things to do, another
thousand to remember. People kept coming in to say good-by. Peter
wandered out on the door-steps when Mary's back was turned, took cold,
and was threatened with croup. Mrs. Forcythe was half sick herself from
worry and fatigue. And all this time Mary, instead of helping, was one
of her mother's chief anxieties. She fretted and complained continually.
Every thing went wrong. Each article put into the boxes cost her a flood
of tears. Each friend who dropped in, renewed the sense of loss. She
scarcely noticed her mother's pale face at all. All the brightness and
busy-ness in her was changed for selfish lamentations, and still the
burden of her complaint was, "I shan't have any flowers in Redding. My
garden, oh, my garden."

"I don't know what's come to her," said poor Mrs. Forcythe. "She's not
like the same child at all." And old Mrs. Clapp, who had been very fond
of Mary, declared that she never knew a girl so altered.

"She's the most _contrary_ piece you ever saw," she said to her
daughter. "I could have given her a right-down good slap just now for
the way she spoke to her mother. It's all her fault that the baby took
cold. She don't lift a hand to help, and I expect as sure as Fate that
we'll have Mrs. Forcythe sick before we get through. I wouldn't have
believed that such a likely girl as Mary Forcythe could act so."

Poor "contrary" Mary! She was very unhappy. The fatal last morning came.
All the boxes were packed. The drays, laden with furniture and beds,
stood at the gate. Mrs. Clapp, and Mrs. Elder, the class-leader, were
going over the house collecting last things and doing last jobs. Mary
wandered out alone into the garden for a farewell look at her pets.

"Good-by, pansies," she said, bending over them. There were only five in
the bed now, for Mary had taken up one and packed it in paper to carry
with her. A big tear hopped down her nose and splashed into the middle
of the yellow pansy, her favorite of all. It turned up its bright
kitten-face just the same. None of them minded Mary's going away.
Flowers are sometimes so unkind to people.

"Good-by, rose-bush," proceeded Mary, turning from the pansy-bed.
"Good-by, honey-suckle. Good-by, peony. Good-by, matter-i-mony." This
sounds funny, but Mary only meant by it a vine with a small purple
flower which grew over the back-door. "Good-by, lilac," she went on.
"Good-by, grass plot." This brought her to the gate. The wagon stood
waiting to carry them to the railroad, three miles away. Mrs. Forcythe,
with the baby in her arms, was just getting in. "Hurry, Mary," called
her father. Slowly she opened the gate, slowly shut it. Her father
helped her over the wheel. She sat down beside Frank. Mrs. Clapp waved
her handkerchief, then put it to her eyes. Mary took a long look at the
pretty garden just budding with spring, and burst into tears. Mr.
Forcythe chirruped to the horse; they were off,--and that was their
good-by to Valley Hill.

Redding was certainly very different. It was an old-fashioned town with
narrow streets, which smelt of fish. Most of the people were sailors, or
had something to do with ships. There were several nice churches, and
outside the town a few handsome houses, but there were a great many poor
people in the place and not many rich ones.

In the very narrowest of all the streets stood the parsonage; a little
brick house with a paved yard behind, just wide enough for
clothes-lines. When the wash was hung out there was not an inch to
spare on either side. Mary gave up all hope as soon as she saw it. There
was not room even for _one_ pansy. The windows looked out on chimneys
and roofs and other backyards, with lines of wet clothes flapping in the
sun. Not a tree was to be seen. Any one might be excused for thinking it
doleful; and Mary, having made up her mind beforehand to dislike it,
found it easy to keep her resolution.

There was no possibility of getting things to rights that night; though
several people came in to help, and a comfortable supper was ready
spread for the travellers on their arrival. Mrs. Forcythe was cheered by
this kindness, but Mary could not be cheerful. She had to sleep upon a
mattress laid on the floor. At another time this would have been fun,
but now it did not seem funny at all; it was only part and parcel of the
misery of coming to live in Redding. She cried herself to sleep, and
came down in the morning with swollen eyelids and a disposition to make
the very worst of things,--easy enough for any girl to do if she sets
about it.

She scarcely thanked her father when he went out and bought a red pot
for the unlucky pansy, which, after its travels and its night in brown
paper, looked as disconsolate as Mary herself. "I know it'll die right
away," she muttered as she set it on the window-sill. "Oh, dear, there's
mother calling. What _does_ she want?"

"Mary, dear," said Mrs. Forcythe when she went down, "where have you
been? I want you to put away the dishes for me."

"I'm so tired," objected Mary crossly.

"Don't you think that mother must be tired too?" asked her father
gravely.

Mary blushed and began to place the cups and plates on the cupboard
shelves. Her slow movements attracted her father's attention.
ages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

